# Environmental, social, and morphological drivers of fission-fusion dynamics in a social ungulate

-   Authors:
    - Morgane Le Goff
    - Jack G. Hendrix
    - Quinn M.R. Webber
    - [Alec L. Robitaille](http://robitalec.ca)
    - [Eric Vander Wal](http://weel.gitlab.io)


##  Abstract

Social groups exist because individuals within the group accrue a net benefit
from sharing space. The profitability of sociality, however, varies with
ecological context. As ecological context varies, tension emerges among the
costs and benefits of social grouping. Fission-fusion societies are fluid in
their group dynamics across spatial and temporal contexts, permitting insights
into how context affects whether animals choose to join or depart a group. We
tested four non-mutually exclusive hypotheses driving variation in fission and
fusion in caribou: the risky places, environment heterogeneity, activity budget,
and social familiarity hypotheses. The risky places hypothesis predicts animals
are unlikely to diffuse when habitats are open and risk of predation is
elevated. The habitat heterogeneity hypothesis predicts that fission is more
likely in a heterogeneous landscape due to the rising conflicts of interest
between group members. The activity budget hypothesis predicts dyads associate
by body size due to similar food passage rates. The social cohesion hypothesis
predicts that familiar individuals are less likely to fission. We tested the
hypotheses using time-to-event (time before fission) analyses and a linear model
that assesses spatial, social, and body size relationships among female caribou
(n = 22) on Fogo Island, Newfoundland, Canada. Contrary to our prediction for
risky places, probability of fission was not influenced by habitat openness. The
hypothesis of environmental heterogeneity was partially supported, as caribou
remained less cohesive in environments with a higher richness of habitats. No
direct evidence emerged to support the activity budget hypothesis. However, it
appears that caribou maintain the strongest social bonds among variably sized
individuals and these social bonds do decrease the propensity to split.
Collectively, our findings showed that social interactions may depend not only
on individual identity and characteristics, but also the spatial context in
which these interactions occur.